---
layout: post
title: "Hello, R-Land."
date: 2011-08-19 17:14
comments: true
categories: 
---
There comes a time in the life of every website, when in the face of alarmingly infrequent updates, positively atrocious coding skills, characteristically low creativity, staggeringly low hits, and pretty much, lack of anything else to do, one is forced to resort to extreme measures - Put up pictures of naked chicks on the website. Unfortunately, this brilliant idea was vetoed by all the other members of the team. So, we present to you the next best thing – the WONA blog. All the news, views, reviews that you never wanted to read in the first place, are now available on one website, so that not reading them has never been easier. It gets better- this time around, the WONA blog is open to all.

So, whether you’re in the mood for a little Monday morning rant, or a Ayn Randesque post about life, the insti and everything, or whether that google search for ‘random funny blogs about hostel life by authors not very fussy about copyright infringement’ finally gave a valid result or you’re just plain jobless, you know that WONA’s loyal readers (yes, all three of them) will religiously follow your every post, and spam the comments section.



As you can see from the above corny lines, there’s only so much creativity in this world, and most of it is in other people.



P.S. Appreciative comments are welcome.

P.P.S. Unappreciative comments are also welcome but will only be redirected to the recycle bin.
