---
layout: post
title: Udhghosh 2013
categories: [wona, news]
tag: news
excerpt: IITR's performance in Udhghosh 2013
---

Udghosh, the annual sports festival of IITK, is regarded to be one of the most prestigious and competitive sport meets with participation from a large number of technical institutes of India. This year's edition of Udghosh was held between 26th and 29th of September. Along with all kinds of sporting events, a host of informal events like treasure hunts, sports quiz etc., the festival was perfected to cater to the sports enthusiasts.

The Taekwondo team from IITR were the stars of the festival, bagging a whopping 30 medals out of the 36 that were available. The other teams from IITR sadly did not fare so well with only the basketball girls team winning the silver medal and the weightlifting team with a few medals. The people who attended the events were impressed by the arrangements and the sports facilities provided by the institute. Particularly, the 24x7 sports arenas and the sheer openness of the facilities induced envy among the students of our institute. In addition to these, interestingly, a few movies were screened, supposedly to inspire the contestants. So much, for a sporting event!

As is the case with all events and festivals, Udghosh was not entirely free from allegations of corruption and petty partialities towards the home team. Nevertheless the event was a decent one with a lot of memories to take back, according to the participants. Udhghosh is seen as the practice tournament before the run up to the main event, Inter IIT Sports Meet, held in December. Hopefully, the teams can learn from their mistakes and put up a stronger performance in Guwahati.
