---
layout: post
title: Inter-IIT'15 and Udghosh
image: inter-iit-15.jpg
tags: [wona, column]
category: sports
---

After the conclusion of the Inter-IIT aquatics meet held at IIT Madras and Udghosh 2015 held at IIT Kanpur, Watch Out News Agency, in a talk with Kuber Dutt Sharma, GS Sports, attempted to analyse the performance of IIT-R contingent, the future plans of the Sports Council and probe into some lesser known behind-the-scenes facts about the Sports division.

Addressing the concern about the aquatics team’s debacle, he admitted to the ignominy and regarded the graduation of the old, experienced and talented members as the primary concern. He was hopeful of rebuilding a new team which could take us to the helm. The hope also rests with other sports as the inexperienced contingent at Udghosh gave a sterling performance in spite of losing some key seniors and finished as overall runners up. The team structure will be changed to
include team hierarchy to address this issue. It is to be noted that the inability of acquiring proper aquatics coaches was another major factor. Needless to say, with the current geographical location and the post not coming under the government pay scale, there are not enough incentives for coaches to head towards R-land. Even if the Sports Council starts thinking of replicating the sports structure of other major IITs, the answers again point to the weather and location of
Roorkee which badly limit the practice hours of the aquatics contingent unlike other IITs like Madras and Bombay. A temperature controlled pool has been dismissed as being beyond the budget of the institution, but the Sports Council remains optimistic about broaching the issue again. The proposal is underway to modify the timings of the Sports Complex so as to ensure proper access to every sports enthusiast on campus. Regarding the possibility of training our sportsmen at Noida
extension campus under professional and international coaches who would otherwise hesitate to come to Roorkee, the response was rather allusive. “The infrastructure there”, says Kuber, “is not very developed and the institute is trying its best to train its sportsmen. For instance, the athletics team was sent to Dehradun to train on synthetic tracks.”

There were also some revelations on the future plans of the Sports Council. The participants in Sangram were disadvantaged with a very short prep time last year but that won’t be the case this year. Some good infrastructural and structural changes are on a roll. For instance, a new gym is being built which will greatly improve the sporting scenario. Taekwondo has been included under the Sports Council. The wastage of sporting equipments is a sad practice, and those
will now be utilised to train students of Anushruti, ABN etc. so as to equip them with better facilities. These equipments will be used to promote sports in nearby villages in association with NSS.

How these changes affect the fortunes of the institute in the upcoming Inter-IIT and Sangram remains to be seen.
