---
layout: post
title: "National Social Summit"
category: news
tags: [wona, column]
image: nss/2023/cover.jpg
excerpt: "The National Social Summit, established in 2016, is a resolution to come together to propose and discuss policy and technical solutions to socio-economic problems pertaining in the country."
---

**Coordinator:** Mr. Chaitanya Gupta

**Organizer:** NSS

**Date:** 10-12 march 2023

**Venue:** IITR campus

**Theme:** Breaking Conventions

**Idea:** Smither farce conventions prevailing in our society, be it social, political, or economical.

The National Social Summit, established in 2016, is a resolution to come together to propose and discuss policy and technical solutions to socio-economic problems pertaining in the country. It aims to bring together socially active groups in IITs, NITs, and other prestigious institutions with a reach of over 500+ colleges as well as stakeholders such as NGOs and activists under an umbrella to think and create solutions.

**Events:**

This year, we're bringing you an exciting lineup of events that will inspire, educate, and entertain. This summit has it all. From Workshops, to Nukkad natak- a drama that will help in creating social awareness, Mun- a platform to put perspectives over an issue across all nations, Case Study- Intensive studies aimed at generalizing over several units from considering views of the concerned authority, Treasure hunt- To keep up the delegates' spirits and create a jovial atmosphere, Action Plan- to find strategies against the challenges that beckon us in the future, Turn Coat- An unconventional debate where you get to watch the same candidate present both sides of the coin just by the sound of a clap!, Sociothon- to build hardware and software solutions for efficient strategies against social hindrances and overcoming existing challenges and Policy Case Study- Reviewing and adapting laws when and wherever necessary is imperative.

**Price pool:** Rs. 15 Lakhs

**Speakers:**

Get ready for an awe-inspiring lineup of speakers who are breaking conventions and leading the way to a brighter future at SocialSummit! From Ashneer Grover, who has redefined the traditional models of business, to Amit Lodha, who has challenged the status quo with his innovative mindset, to Rakhi Pal, who is transforming the event industry with her creative approach, we're honored to have them share their insights and inspire us all. Join us as they share their creativity and willingness to shape the world of tomorrow.

**Past Speakers:**

* CM of Uttarakhand -  Shree Pushkar Singh Dhami
* Mr. Devendra Jhajharia
* Kiran Bedi
* Sonam Wangchuk
* Priyanka Raina
